feat: DH-18281: Add dx filter support (#1185)
deephaven/deephaven-plugins: plugins/plotly-express/docs/filter.md

# Filter By

> To plot a subset of a table based on a column value, use the `filter_by` and `required_filter_by` parameters. These parameters accept column(s) denoting variables to filter on in the dataset. The plot shows only the data that matches the filter criteria. `filter_by` does not require the [input filter](https://deephaven.io/core/docs/how-to-guides/user-interface/filters/#input-filters) or [linker](https://deephaven.io/core/docs/how-to-guides/user-interface/filters/#linker) to be set on that column whereas `required_filter_by` does.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To plot a subset of a table based on a column value, use the `filter_by` and `required_filter_by` parameters. These parameters accept column(s) denoting variables to filter on in the dataset. The plot shows only the data that matches the filter criteria. `filter_by` does not require the [input filter](https://deephaven.io/core/docs/how-to-guides/user-interface/filters/#input-filters) or [Linker](https://deephaven.io/core/docs/how-to-guides/user-interface/filters/#linker) to be set on that column, whereas `required_filter_by` does.
```

Under the hood, the Deephaven query engine performs a `partition_by` table operation on the given filter column. This efficient implementation means that plots with many groups can be filtered and redrawn quickly, even with large datasets.

> [!NOTE]

> > If you are familiar with the `one_click` API it works similarly to `filter_by`, but there are some differences in behavior:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> `filter_by` works similarly to the `one_click` API, although there are some differences in behavior:
```

> > In the `one_click` API, if filters are provided but not set then one trace is charted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> In the `one_click` API, if filters are provided but not set, then one trace is charted.
```

> > In the `filter_by` API, if filters are provided but not set then all values within the filter columns are charted on separate traces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> In the `filter_by` API, if filters are provided but not set, then all values within the filter columns are charted on separate traces.
```

> > This provides a consistent experience with plot by behavior, but may not be optimal if filtering on numeric columns with many unique values.

Reviewer: `plot_by`?

Author: `by` argument, made that more explicit

> [!NOTE]
> Mixing optional and required filters displays overlays to enter filters for all columns. Only the `required_filter_by` filters are actually required and the message is dismissed when all of those are provided.

```python skip-test
import deephaven.plot.express as dx

stocks = dx.data.stocks()  # import the example stocks data set

# specify `x` and `y` columns, as well as additional filter variables with `filter_by` and `required_filter_by`
filtered_line_plot = dx.line(
    stocks, x="Timestamp", y="Price", filter_by="Sym", required_filter_by="Exchange"
)
```

### Filter by and plot by

To mix a filter and [plot by](plot-by.md), provide columns to both `filter_by` and `by`. By default, all grouping variables within the columns are shown for `by` and `filter_by`.

```python skip-test
import deephaven.plot.express as dx

stocks = dx.data.stocks()  # import the example stocks data set

# specify `x` and `y` columns, as well as additional filter variables with `filter_by`
filtered_line_plot = dx.line(
    stocks, x="Timestamp", y="Price", by="Sym", filter_by="Exchange"
)
```

### `PartitionedTable` filter by

> Providing a `PartitionedTable` defaults to a [plot by](plot-by.md) for the key columns that the table is partitioned on. Set `filter_by=True` to make the columns filters instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Providing a `PartitionedTable` defaults to a [plot by](plot-by.md) for the key columns on which the table is partitioned. Set `filter_by=True` to make the columns filters instead.
```

```python skip-test
import deephaven.plot.express as dx

# import and partition on example stocks data set
stocks = dx.data.stocks()
partitioned_stocks = stocks.partition_by(["Sym", "Exchange"])

# specify `x` and `y` columns, and make "Sym" and "Exchange" filters
filtered_line_plot = dx.line(
    partitioned_stocks, x="Timestamp", y="Price", filter_by=True
)
```

### `PartitionedTable` required filter by

> Providing a `PartitionedTable` defaults to a [plot by](plot-by.md) for the key columns that the table is partitioned on. Set `required_filter_by=True` to make the columns required filters instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Providing a `PartitionedTable` defaults to a [plot by](plot-by.md) for the key columns on which the table is partitioned. Set `required_filter_by=True` to make the columns required filters instead.
```

```python skip-test
import deephaven.plot.express as dx

# import and partition on example stocks data set
stocks = dx.data.stocks()
partitioned_stocks = stocks.partition_by(["Sym", "Exchange"])

# specify `x` and `y` columns, and make "Sym" and "Exchange" required filters
filtered_line_plot = dx.line(
    partitioned_stocks, x="Timestamp", y="Price", required_filter_by=True
)
```

### `PartitionedTable` filter by and plot by

> Providing a `PartitionedTable` defaults to a [plot by](plot-by.md) for the key columns that the table is partitioned on. Set `filter_by` to a subset of the key columns to make those columns filters instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Providing a `PartitionedTable` defaults to a [plot by](plot-by.md) for the key columns on which the table is partitioned. Set `filter_by` to a subset of the key columns to make those columns filters instead.
```

```python skip-test
import deephaven.plot.express as dx

# import and partition on example stocks data set
stocks = dx.data.stocks()
partitioned_stocks = stocks.partition_by(["Sym", "Exchange"])

# specify `x` and `y` columns, and make "Sym" a filter, maintaining "Exchange" as a plot by
filtered_line_plot = dx.line(
    partitioned_stocks, x="Timestamp", y="Price", filter_by="Sym"
)
```

### Subplot filter by

`make_subplots` maintains any `filter_by` and `required_filter_by` filter columns originally passed into the subplots.

> [!WARNING]

> > Multiple filters with the same name but different types are not currently supported. Rename columns so that they are unique if necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Using multiple filters with the same name but different types is not currently supported. Rename columns to ensure they are unique, if necessary.
```
